// Bismillahirrahmanirahim



Selam Aleykum this is Feqi

For societies the nation-state model is nothing
but a pitfall and network of suppression and
exploitation. The democratic nation concept
reverses this definition. The definition of a
democratic nation that is not bound by rigid
political boundaries, one language, culture,
religion and interpretation of history, signifies
plurality and communities as well as free and
equal citizens existing together and in solida-
rity. The democratic nation allows the people
to become a nation themselves, without res-
ting on power and state, becoming a nation
through much needed politicisation. It aims
to prove that not only through politicisation
but also, in the absence of becoming a state or
acquiring power, a nation can be created with
autonomous institutions in the social, diplo-
matic, and cultural spheres as well as in eco-
nomy, law and self-defence, and thus build
itself as a democratic nation.
Democratic society can only be realised throu-
gh such a nation model. The nation-state
society is closed to democracy by its very
Democratic Nation
nature. The nation-state represents neither a


                                    Abdullah Öcalan



   English               International Initiative Edition
This brochure is online:
http://ocalan-books.com/english/democratic-nation.html

Abdullah Öcalan:
Democratic Nation
first edition 2016
© Abdullah Öcalan

ISBN: 978-3-945326-35-0
Translation: International Initiative
Published by:
International Initiative Edition
in cooperation with Mesopotamian Publishers, Neuss

International Initiative
“Freedom for Abdullah Öcalan – Peace in Kurdistan”
P.O. Box 100511
50445 Cologne
Germany
www.freedom-for-ocalan.com
www.freeocalan.org
www.ocalan-books.com
Democratic Nation


 Abdullah Öcalan
Contents
FOREWORD                                           7
1. INTRODUCTION                                    9
2. CAPITALIST MODERNITY AND THE NATION            12
3. DEMOCRATIC MODERNITY                           17
4. DEMOCRATIC SOLUTION                            19
5. THE DEMOCRATIC NATION MODEL                    23
    5.1 Kurds Becoming a Nation                   28
    5.2 Th
          e Democratic Autonomy Solution
        and its Implementation                    31
    5.3 Th
          e KCK and the Dimensions of Becoming
        a Democratic Nation                       32
     1 –  The Free Individual-Citizen and
          Democratic ­Communal Life               33
     2 – Political Life and Democratic Autonomy   35
     3 – Social Life                              39
     4 – Free Partner Life                        41
     5 – Economic Autonomy                        44
     6 – Legal Structure                          49
     7 – Culture                                   51
     8 – Self-Defence System                      55
     9 – Diplomacy                                57
6. TO BE A QUESTER OF DEMOCRATIC NATION
   ­SOLUTION                                      60
7. CONCLUSION                                     62
ON THE AUTHOR                                     67
ON THE INTERNATIONAL INITIATIVE                   68
PUBLICATIONS BY ABDULLAH ÖCALAN                   69




                                                   5
6
FOREWORD



The International Initiative “Freedom for Abdullah Öcalan –
Peace in Kurdistan” strives not only to publish Abdullah Öca-
lan’s works in different languages but also to prepare brochures
compiled from different books by him on specific topics. This
is useful and necessary not only because it brings together
the chain of argument on a specific topic spread over several
books, but also because some of his works are still untrans-
lated. Therefore, this brochure should only be regarded as a
framework and cannot replace the perusal of the actual books.
   Öcalan has been highly critical not only of capitalism but
also of real socialist practices from very early on, since the
1980s. He has examined the issue of women’s freedom, the
phenomena of power and state and how interrelated they all
are. This has led him over and over again to return to an anal-
ysis of history to try to understand how it all happened. In
doing so he stumbled over nation, state and nation-state and
how detrimental these are for any movement; turning even the
most revolutionary individuals into mere practitioners of capi-
talism.
   For Abdullah Öcalan it is not sufficient to produce critique
and self-critique. He feels compelled to lay out what might
constitute an alternative to the way of life that is being im-
posed on society. Therefore, he makes an effort to systematise
the lives and struggles of all those oppressed and exploited
throughout history, as well as to propose an alternative model
and way of life outside of capitalist modernity and thus classi-
cal civilisation.
   These brochures become ever more important in the light
of developments in the region as well as in Kurdistan. With

                                                              7
the revival of sectarian and nationalist conflict in many areas
of the world and the consequences of an aggressive capitalism
confronting the world, Öcalan’s proposals and an evident ef-
fort to implement them in Rojava and Bakur might be just the
right remedy for the war-stricken region. He calls upon every-
body to build and defend free life and humanity.
   Öcalan’s voice is tremendously important as a voice of peace
and reason, but it is all too often silenced by his solitary con-
finement on the isolated Imrali Island where he is imprisoned.
His freedom is in the interest of all peoples in the Middle East
– not only for the Kurds.
International Initiative
“Freedom for Abdullah Öcalan – Peace in Kurdistan”




8
1. INTRODUCTION



The PKK’s struggle until now was essentially aimed at mak-
ing the Kurdish question visible. The denial of Kurdish reality
during the time of its formation naturally brought the ques-
tion of existence on the agenda. Thus, the PKK at first tried
to prove the existence of the question, by means of ideological
arguments. The continuation of this denial by the left through
more refined methods placed on the agenda organising our-
selves on the basis of distinct identities and actions.
   The Turkish nation-state – who insisted on traditional denial
and annihilation policies – refused to consider the possibility
of a political solution during this period. On the contrary, it
chose to counter the PKK’s initiatives with a campaign of fas-
cist terror that led up to the 12 September coup. PKK’s decla-
ration of a revolutionary people’s war emerged as the only vi-
able option. Under these conditions, PKK was either going to
wither away, like the other democratic left groups in Turkey, or
decide on resistance. The decisive factor in the transformation
of the Kurdish question from being one of ideological iden-
tity into a question of war is state’s insistence on maintaining
previously covert policies of denial and annihilation through
the open terror of 12 September. It would be more realistic to
analyse the offensive of 15 August 1984 within this framework.
Such a move is much closer to the objective of proving the
existence of the Kurdish people and protecting their existence
than of being a liberation movement. It should be pointed out
that, in this regard, it has attained a significant success.
   The PKK, while proving Kurdish existence beyond any
doubt, remained rooted in nation-statism. The ensuing period
of self-criticism revealed the anti-socialist and anti-democratic

                                                               9
essence of nation-statism. The speedy dissolution of real social-
ism in the 1990s contributed to a deeper understanding of the
underlying factors behind the depression. The dissolution of
real socialism was caused by power and real socialist nation-
state problematics. To be more precise, the crisis of socialism
was the result of an inadequate understanding of the problem
of power and the state. When the contradictions of state and
power, set out so starkly by the Kurdish question, coalesced
with the wider global crisis of real socialism, a comprehensive
analysis of the issue of the state and power became inevitable.
   To this end, in a significant part of my defence, I try to
analyse the state and power throughout civilisational history.
I concentrated on presenting the transformation of the phe-
nomena of state and power in the context of capitalist mo-
dernity – the present-day hegemonic civilisation. I specifically
argued that the transformation of power into the nation-state
was the basis of capitalism. This was an important thesis. I
tried to demonstrate that in the absence of power being or-
ganised through the nation-state model, capitalism could not
have become the new hegemonic system. The nation- state was
the fundamental tool that made capitalist hegemony possible.
Therefore, I tried to prove that socialism, as anti-capitalism,
presenting itself as what I call “historical-society”, could not
establish itself as based on the same state model, in other
words, as a real socialist nation-state. I tried to show that the
idea that socialism, as proposed by Marx and Engels, could
only be constructed through central nation-states was indeed
a fundamental defect of scientific socialism. I went on to pre-
sent the thesis that socialism could not be constructed through
the state, especially the nation-state, and that an insistence
on this could only result in the most degenerate versions of
capitalism as experienced in many instances, but especially in
the actually-existing socialism of Russia and China. As a neces-

10
sary precursor to this thesis, I analysed the system of central
civilisation throughout history, the concept of power, and the
structure of capitalist modernity’s state and power which is the
prevalent structure unique to our era. My main conclusion was
that socialists could not have a nation-state principle. Rather,
the solution to the national question should be based on the
democratic nation principle. The practical expression of this,
as I will try to show, is the KCK – the Union of Democratic
Communities in Kurdistan – experience.
   Kurdistan, in a way, has already become the focus of revo-
lution and counter-revolution in the twenty-first century. It
is the weakest link of capitalist modernity. The national and
social problems of the people of Kurdistan have become so
aggravated that they cannot be concealed by means of liberal
prescriptions or the demagogy of individual or cultural rights.
When it comes to the Kurdish question, nation-statism –
which led to different practices, including cultural genocide
– is no longer a problem-solver; rather, it has long been the
source of the problem, both for the oppressor and the op-
pressed. Nation-statism is in dissolution and it has even be-
come a problem for capitalist modernity. More flexible demo-
cratic national developments will spearhead the advances of
our era. Democratic modernity signifies the theoretical expres-
sion and the practical steps of these advances. The KCK, as the
concrete expression of democratic national transformations in
Kurdistan, sheds light on the path of democratic modernity
solution in the Middle East.




                                                             11
2. CAPITALIST MODERNITY AND THE
NATION




The nation, as a concept, comes after entities such as clan and
tribe with kinship in the form of people and nationality, and is
a social form that is generally characterised by linguistic or cul-
tural similarities. National communities are more inclusionary
and have larger capacities than clan and people’s communities;
for this reason, they are human communities with looser ties
to one another. National society is more of a phenomenon of
our time. If a general definition can be offered, it is a commu-
nity of those who share a common mindset. In other words, it
is a phenomenon that exists mentally, which therefore means
it is an abstract and imagined phenomenon. We can also call
this a culturally defined nation. Sociologically speaking, this
would be the correct definition. Despite differing class, gender,
colour, ethnicity and even national background, in the most
general sense, the formation of a shared mindset and culture is
enough to be classified as a nation.
   In order to refine this general definition of nation, generated
concepts such as state nation, legal nation, economic nation,
military nation are different categories of nationalism that are
used to underpin the understanding of this general definition
of nation. It could also be called ‘power nation’. It is a funda-
mental aspiration of capitalist modernity to become a strong
nation; forasmuch as a strong nation produces capital privi-
lege, a comprehensive market, colonial opportunities and im-

12
perialism. It is, therefore, important not to accept these robust
versions of the nation as the only possible model of a nation.
In fact, it is important to see these power nations as nations in
the service of capital. These are the qualities that make it the
source of the problem.
   The main problem in the age of modernity derives from the
coupling of power and state with the nation. When we com-
pare the problems of this age with the problems of dictator-
ships and dynastic states, we can see that the problems of the
age of modernity derive from the state nation; this state nation
is the biggest difference between the ages. The nation-state is
one of the most convoluted subjects within the social sciences,
yet it is presented as the tool to solve all the problems that face
modernity, like a magic wand. In essence, it only multiplies so-
cial problems. The reason being, it spreads the power apparatus
into the capillaries of societies. Power itself creates problems – it
generates social problems because of the potential character of
capital that has been organised in the form of force, which re-
sults in suppression and exploitation. The homogeneous nation
society to which the nation-state aspires can only construct ar-
tificially (supposedly legal) equal citizens, charged with violence
as a result of being amputated by power. This citizen may be
equal in the eyes of the law, but experiences maximum inequal-
ity in every aspect of life as an individual and collective entity.
   When analysing the theory of nation, another aspect that
needs to be critically evaluated is the sacralisation and deifica-
tion of the nation. Capitalist modernity has replaced tradition-
al religion and god and constructed the deified nation-state.
If we interpret nationalism as the religion of the nation-state,
then we can perceive the nation-state itself to be the god of
this religion. The state itself has been constructed in the age
of modernity in order to incorporate the essence of medieval
and even antiquarian conceptualisations of divinity. The phe-

                                                                  13
nomenon called ‘secular state’ is the construction of medieval
and antiquarian divinities as state either in whole or in essence.
There should be no mistake here. Once you scrape off the sec-
ular or modern nation-state veneer, you encounter the divine
state of antiquity and the medieval age. There is a strong cor-
relation between state and divinity. In the same manner, there
is a very strong relationship between the rising monarch of an-
tiquity and the medieval ages and the concept of god. After
the medieval age, when the monarch lost his significance, both
as an individual and in terms of the monarchy, and began
to institutionalise and transmute into the national state, the
god-monarch was replaced by the nation-state god. Therefore,
capitalist modernity’s ideological hegemony, which makes the
attainment of maximum profit possible, is what underlies the
sacralisation of concepts such as the homeland, nation and
market, together with a similar sacralisation of nation-state
institutions. The law of maximum profit becomes more legiti-
mate as the concepts related to the nation are religionised by
the ideological hegemony and thus validated.
   In our age, the use of nation-state symbols and fundamental
slogans such as “one flag”, “one language”, “one homeland”,
“one state”, “unitary state”, and the expression of national
chauvinism are ramped up and turned into a ritual at every
opportunity, especially at sporting events or art activities,
should be interpreted as the means of worshipping the reli-
gion of nationalism. In fact, the practice of worship in previ-
ous ages served the same purpose. The main objective here is
to validate the interests of monopolies of power and exploita-
tion either through concealing or legitimising them. We will
be better able to understand the truth of societal reality once
we interpret all the practices and approaches that serve to hide
or exaggerate all things related to the nation-state under this
fundamental paradigm.

14
   The organisation of capitalist modernity as nation-state plays
a much more suppressive and exploitative role then its organi-
sation as an economic monopoly. The inability of Marxism,
and sociology in general, to see the nation-state’s relationship
with suppression and exploitation, or its presentation of the
nation-state as an ordinary institution of the superstructure, is
a fundamental flaw and distortion. When an analysis of class
and material capital is made independent of the nation-state,
what’s being produced is the most stale and abstract generalisa-
tion that cannot generate a useful social result. The role played
by the consequences related to such abstractions underlies the
failure of real socialism.
   That the solution to all national and social problems is
linked to the nation-state represents the most tyrannical as-
pect of modernity. To expect a solution from the tool which
is itself the source of problems can only lead to the growth
of problems and societal chaos. Capitalism itself is the most
crisis-ridden stage of civilisation. The nation-state, as the tool
deployed in this crisis-ridden stage, is the most developed or-
ganisation of violence in social history. It is society besieged by
the violence of power; it is the tool deployed forcefully to hold
together society and the environment after they have been dis-
integrated through industrialism and capitalism’s law of maxi-
mum profit. The reason behind it being excessively charged
with violence is due to the capitalist system’s tendency for
maximum profit and uninterrupted accumulation. Without
an organisation of violence like the nation-state, the laws of
capitalist accumulation could not operate and industrialism
could not be maintained. The society and the environment
are on the brink of total disintegration in this present era of
global finance capitalism. The crises, which were initially cycli-
cal, have now attained a structural and permanent character.
Under these circumstances, the nation-state itself has turned

                                                                15
into an obstacle that locks the system down completely. Even
capitalism, which is a crisis-ridden system itself, has made get-
ting rid of the obstacle of the nation-state a priority. The sov-
ereignty of the nation-state is not only the cause of societal
problems, but is also the main obstacle in the way of solutions.
   The theory of democratic modernity, on the other hand, is
not only critical of capitalism’s political economy, but of its
whole systematic. It criticises its relationship with civilisational
history as a hegemonic system; the changes it has caused in
city, class and state; and the elements upon which it constructs
its modernity in order to uncover its reality. Capitalist mo-
dernity continuously legitimises itself through the ideological
hegemony it establishes over science, philosophy and the arts.
By instrumentalising these fundamental fields of thought and
draining them of their content, it deepens its destruction of
society.




16
3. DEMOCRATIC MODERNITY




The alternative modernity of democratic nation is democratic
modernity. An economy free of monopolism, an ecology that
signifies harmony with the environment, and a technology
that is friendly to nature and humanity are the institutional
bases of democratic modernity and thus democratic nation. I
am neither discovering nor inventing democratic modernity.
Democratic modernity, since the formation of official civilisa-
tion, has always existed as its counterpart in a dichotomy. It
has existed wherever and whenever the official civilisation has
existed. What I am trying to do, albeit as a rough outline, is
to give this other form of modernity, which exists at each loca-
tion and time of official civilisation, the recognition it deserves
and offer explanations in terms of its main dimensions. I am
also trying to understand its fundamental forms of mindset, its
structures and its existing society and to define them. There is
nothing baffling about the idea that, according to dialectics,
there exists a counterpart to civilisation, although alleged to
be singular, at all places and periods that it has existed. To the
contrary, the baffling thing is why this most natural equivalent
of dialectical method has not been systematically articulated.
   Democratic modernity, though it has changed form accord-
ing to the different eras, has always existed and is a reality that
has always had its own counter history throughout civilisation-
al history. It signifies the system of the universal history that
is outside of the forces of tyranny and exploitation. Kurdish

                                                                17
reality represents a culture that has received the severest blows
from civilisational forces and is the culture that has been at-
tacked by forces intent on exterminating it. Therefore, it can
only realise its existence through a civilisation which is outside
the traditional classed civilisation – the democratic socialist
civilisation. If a meaningful Kurdish history is to be written,
it can only be done so within this framework. The present day
expression of this is democratic modernity.
   Democratic modernity responds to the universalist, linear,
progressivist and determinist methodology (the methodologi-
cal approach that is closed to probabilities and alternatives)
deployed by the modern nation-state to achieve the homogeni-
sation and herdification of society with methods that are plural-
istic, probabilistic, open to alternatives and that can make the
democratic society visible. It develops its alternative through its
properties of being open to different political formations, mul-
ticultural, closed to monopolism, ecological and feminist, creat-
ing an economic structure that is grounded in satisfying society’s
fundamental needs and is at the disposal of the community.
As opposed to capitalist modernity’s nation-state, democratic
confederalism is democratic modernity’s political alternative.
   Democratic confederalism is the basic political format of
democratic modernity, represents a vital role in reconstruction
work and is the most appropriate tool for democratic politics
in generating a solution. Democratic confederalism presents
the option of a democratic nation as the fundamental tool to
resolve the ethnic, religious, urban, local, regional and national
problems caused by the monolithic, homogeneous, mono-
chrome, fascist social model implemented by modernity’s
nation-state. Within the democratic nation every ethnicity, re-
ligious understanding, city, local, regional and national entity
has the right to participate with its own identity and demo-
cratic federate structure.

18
4. DEMOCRATIC SOLUTION




There have always been attempts to solve the national prob-
lems caused by capitalist modernity by nation-statist and na-
tionalist mindsets and paradigms. The nation-state itself has
been presented as the main actor of the solution. In order to
gain a true understanding of the nation-state one must under-
stand its place in the hegemonic system and its links to capital-
ism and industrialism. The inadequate analysis of the question
of state by socialist ideology only obscured the problem fur-
ther. However, in “the right of nations to self-determination”,
the vision of a state for every nation was fundamental in ag-
gravating the issue even more.
   The essence of my defence is to research the Kurdish real-
ity and Kurdish people’s existence in relation to civilisation
and modernity. The aim is to explain that capitalism was pri-
marily responsible for the rise of the Kurdish question and
to separate the democratic essence of the solution from na-
tion-statism for the first time. This approach constitutes the
essence of the transformation within the PKK. This defence
explains the difference between forms of statist and democratic
solutions that have not been clarified since the PKK’s group
phase. This is where it differs from real socialism and the clas-
sic Marxist-Leninist doctrine behind it. It takes the right of
nations to self-determination from its enclosure as a bourgeois
right, and includes it within the scope of societal democracy.
In other words, the Kurdish question could be solved without

                                                              19
being contaminated by statism, without gravitating towards a
nation-statist pursuit and, without being forced into solutions
under these categories, it could be resolved within democratic
governance models of society. This is the essence of the trans-
formation of the PKK.
   The democratic solution model is not just an option, it is
the primary method for achieving a solution. The democratic
solution signifies the pursuit of the democratisation of society
outside of the nation-state. As a concept, it sees the nation-
state, along with capitalism, as the source of ever increasing
problems and not the solution in relation to social problems.
One should not think of the democratic solution model as a
unitary nation-state that has been transformed into a feder-
al or confederal form. The federal or confederal state of the
nation-state is not the democratic solution. These are solutions
that rely on different forms of the state, and yet only aggravate
the problem. Perhaps the transformation of a rigidly central-
ised nation-state into federal or confederal forms within the
capitalist system’s mindset may ameliorate problems and offer
partial solutions, but it cannot lead to comprehensive solu-
tions. Federal and confederal forms can be deployed as pos-
sible solutions between the nation-statist forces and the forces
for a democratic solution. However, to expect a deep-rooted
solution as a result will only lead yet again to self-deception.
Indeed, we know that states described as national liberationist
states or real socialist states are just nation-states with a leftist
mask.
   It is important to note that the democratic solution method
is not completely independent of the nation-state. Democracy
and the nation-state can play a role under the same political
roof as two authorities. A democratic constitution can deter-
mine the domain for each of them. A positive transforma-
tion of the nation-state is closely linked to the development

20
of democratisation, democratic autonomous governance, the
construction of the democratic nation, local democracy and
democratic culture in all social spheres.
   KCK should be evaluated as a radical transformation in
the solution to the national question as it represents the non-
statist democratic interpretation of the right of nations to self-
determination for the Kurdish question. KCK is the concrete
expression of the democratic solution to the Kurdish question
and differs from traditional approaches. The solution is not re-
garded as taking a share from the state. It is not in the pursuit
of state, even in terms of autonomy for the Kurds. Not only
does it not aim for a federal or confederal state, it does not
see them as the solution. Its main demand from the state is
for it to recognise the Kurdish people’s right to self-governance
and to remove the obstacles in the way of the Kurdish peo-
ple becoming a democratic nation. The democratic solution
cannot be developed by governments or states. Societal forces
are themselves solely responsible for developing the solution.
Societal forces seek to find a compromise with the government
or the state through a democratic constitution. The sharing
of governance between the democratic societal forces and the
state or government forces is determined through constitu-
tions.
   Essentially, the democratic solution is the state of being a
democratic nation and of society constructing itself as a demo-
cratic national entity. It is neither becoming a nation nor ceas-
ing to be a nation through the state; it is the ability to use the
right of a society to construct itself as a democratic nation.
At this stage, a new definition of the nation must be created.
First, it is worth noting that the term nation does not have
a single definition. I touched on this above. The democratic
nation, on the other hand, is the common society formed by
the free-will of free individuals and communities. The unifying

                                                               21
factor in the democratic nation is the free-will of the people
and those groups who decide to belong to that nation. The
understanding that binds the nation to a common language,
culture, market or history is descriptive of state-nations and
cannot be generalised, that is, it cannot be reduced to a single
understanding of the nation. This understanding of nation,
which was also acknowledged by real socialism, is the opposite
of democratic nation. This definition, as developed by Stalin
for Soviet Russia, is one of the main reasons for the dissolution
of the Soviet Union. If this definition of nation, absolutised by
capitalist modernity, is not abandoned, then the solution to all
national problems will continue to confront an impasse. The
fact that national problems have persisted for the past three
centuries is closely linked to this inadequate and absolute defi-
nition.




22
5. THE DEMOCRATIC NATION MODEL




For societies the nation-state model is nothing but a pitfall and
network of suppression and exploitation. The democratic na-
tion concept reverses this definition. The definition of a demo-
cratic nation that is not bound by rigid political boundaries,
one language, culture, religion and interpretation of history,
signifies plurality and communities as well as free and equal
citizens existing together and in solidarity. The democratic na-
tion allows the people to become a nation themselves, without
resting on power and state, becoming a nation through much
needed politicisation. It aims to prove that not only through
politicisation but also, in the absence of becoming a state or
acquiring power, a nation can be created with autonomous in-
stitutions in the social, diplomatic, and cultural spheres as well
as in economy, law and self-defence, and thus build itself as a
democratic nation.
   Democratic society can only be realised through such a na-
tion model. The nation-state society is closed to democracy
by its very nature. The nation-state represents neither a uni-
versal nor a local reality; on the contrary, it disavows univer-
sality and locality. The citizenship of an uniformised society
represents the death of the human. On the other hand, the
democratic nation makes the reconstruction of universal-
ity and locality possible. It enables societal reality to express
itself. All other definitions of nation lie between these two
main models.

                                                               23
   Although there is a wide range of definitions for nation-
building models, an all-encompassing definition is also pos-
sible; and this is the definition of nation in relation to its
mindset, consciousness and belief. In this case, the nation is a
community of people who share a common mindset. In such a
definition of nation language, religion, culture, market, history
and political borders do not play a decisive but a bodily role.
Defining nation essentially as a certain mindset gives it a dy-
namic character. Whereas in state’s nation nationalism leaves
its mark on the common mindset, in a democratic nation it is
the consciousness of freedom and solidarity. However, defining
nations only through their mindset would be incomplete. Just
as mindsets cannot exist without bodies, nations too cannot
function without a body. The body of nations with a national-
ist mindset is the state institution. This is why such nations are
called the state-nation. When legal and economic institutions
outweigh the rest, these nations can be differentiated by cat-
egorising them as law or market nations.
   Nations with a mindset based on freedom and solidarity ex-
emplify democratic autonomy. Democratic autonomy essen-
tially denotes the self-governance of communities and individ-
uals who share a similar mindset through their own will. This
could also be called democratic governance or authority. It is a
definition open to universality. A nation model that can be de-
rived from culture nation, but kerbs and excludes exploitation
and suppression, is a democratic nation model. A democratic
nation is the nation closest to freedom and equality. And in ac-
cordance with this definition, this is the ideal understanding of
nation for communities who strive for freedom and equality.
   Capitalist modernity and the science of sociology that it has
inspired have not dealt with the concept of the democratic
nation due to their structure and ideological hegemony. The
democratic nation is not content with a common mindset and

24
culture, it is a nation that unifies and governs all its members
in democratic autonomous institutions. This is its defining
quality. The democratic autonomous way of governance is
the foremost condition of becoming a democratic nation. In
this regard, it is the alternative to the nation-state. Democratic
governance as opposed to state governance is a significant op-
portunity for freedom and equality. Liberal sociology equates
the nation essentially either to an already established state, or
to a movement that aims to establish a state. The fact that even
real socialism had such ambitions shows the strength of liberal
ideology.
   A common homeland and market are generally presented
as preconditions for national societies; these are material com-
ponents and cannot be considered to be determinant charac-
teristics of the nation. The democratic nation’s understand-
ing of homeland and market are different. The democratic
nation values the homeland because it is a huge opportunity
for the nation’s mindset and culture; a mindset and culture
that does not keep the homeland in mind can not be thought
of. However, it should not be forgotten that the reason why
capitalist modernity fetishises and prioritises the country-
homeland concept over society is profit motivated. It is also
important not to exaggerate the homeland. “Everything for
the country” derives from a fascistic understanding of the na-
tion. It is more meaningful to devote everything to a free soci-
ety and a democratic nation, but this should not be fetishised.
What really matters is to render life valuable. The homeland
isn’t an ideal, it is merely a tool for the life of the individual
and the nation. While the state’s nation pursues homogenised
society, the democratic nation mainly consists of different col-
lectivities. It sees diversity as richness. Life itself is only pos-
sible through diversity. The nation-state forces citizens to be
uniform; in this regard, too, it is contrary to life. The ultimate

                                                                 25
goal is to create a robotic human. In this sense, it actually runs
towards nothingness. The citizen or member of democratic na-
tion is different, this difference is due to the diverse communi-
ties it embodies. Tribal entities are a source of strength for the
democratic nation.
   Although language is as important as culture in creating a na-
tion, it is not a precondition. Different languages are no obsta-
cle to a sense of belonging to the same nation. Just as it is un-
necessary for every nation to have a state, it is also unnecessary
for every nation to have a single language or dialect. Although
a national language is needed, it is not an indispensable condi-
tion. It is possible to count different languages and dialects as
a richness for a democratic nation. However, the nation-state
bases itself on a strict imposition of a single language. It does
not easily give multilingualism, especially official multilingual-
ism, a chance to be practised. In this regard, it tries to benefit
from the privileges of being the dominant nation.
   When democratic nations are unable to develop and nation-
statism is unable to resolve problems it is possible to talk of
a law nation as a concept and to find a compromise. What
is meant by “constitutional citizenship” is actually a solu-
tion based on law nation. A constitutionally guaranteed legal
citizenship does not discriminate between race, ethnicity and
nationality. These characteristics do not accord rights. In this
regard, “law nation” is a developing category. European na-
tions in particular are transitioning from nationality nations to
law nations. In democratic nations, autonomous governance is
fundamental; in a law nation, rights are fundamental. Whereas
in the nation-state, it is the rule of power that is decisive. The
most dangerous nation type is the ‘army-nation’ mindset and
its institutionalisation. Although it may seem as if it represents
a strong nation, in essence it is the most difficult nation to
live in, containing a mindset that always imposes duties and

26
leads to fascism. The economic nation is a category very simi-
lar to the nation-state. This understanding of a nation, seen in
countries such as the USA, Japan and even Germany, where
the economy is given a leading role, was more prevalent in
Europe’s past. Although a socialist nation was attempted, it
can’t be said that it was very successful. This is partially what
we are witnessing in Cuba. However, this example of a nation
is also the real socialist form of the nation-state; in place of a
nation-state with mostly private capitalism, it is a nation-state
form that contains mostly state capitalism.
   The democratic nation is the model of a nation that is the
least exposed to such illnesses of being a state nation. It does
not sacralise its government. Governance is a simple phenom-
enon that is at the service of daily life. Anyone who meets
the requirements can become a public servant and govern.
Leadership is valuable, but not sacred. Its understanding of
national identity is open-ended, not fixed like being a believer
or a member of a religion. Belonging to a nation is neither a
privilege nor a flaw. One can belong to more than one nation.
To be more precise, one can experience intertwined and dif-
ferent nationalities. If a law nation and a democratic nation
reach a compromise, they can comfortably coexist. Homeland,
flag and language are all valuable but not sacred. To experi-
ence the admixture of common homeland, languages and flags
through amity and sharing and not confrontation is not only
possible, but necessary for historical-society life. With all these
characteristics, the democratic nation is once again taking its
place in history as a robust alternative to capitalist modernity’s
maddening instrument of war; nation-statism.
   The democratic nation model, as a constructive solution
model, re-democratises those societal relations that have been
shattered by nation-statism; it renders different identities toler-
ant, peaceful and reconciliatory. The evolution of state’s nation

                                                                27
into a democratic nation will bring about enormous gains. The
democratic nation model ameliorates violence loaded social
perceptions through a right social consciousness and renders
them humane (a human being who is intelligent, sensitive
and empathetic). It may not completely eliminate social anti­
pathies but it can minimise the violence of exploitation, and
help to realise the possibility of a more equal and free society.
It not only fosters internal peace and tolerance, it also tran-
scends suppressive and exploitative approaches to other na-
tions and transforms common interests into synergies through
which it realises its mission. Once national and international
institutions are reconstructed according to the fundamental
mindset and institutions of the democratic nation, it will be
understood that this new modernity, democratic modernity,
not only theoretically but also its implementation has the attri­
butes of a renaissance. The alternative to capitalist modernity
is democratic modernity, with the democratic nation at its
core, and the economic, ecological and peaceful society it has
woven within and outside of the democratic nation.

5.1 Kurds Becoming a Nation
It is possible to think of the process through which Kurds
became a nation within the context of two fundamental con-
cepts.
   The first is the intellectual dimension. We are talking about
the dimensions of existence of those who unite their state of
consciousness in relation to these fundamental areas through
a feeling of common solidarity and sharing an intellectual
world without neglecting their own language, culture, history,
economy and population centres. The main criteria for this di-
mension is to share the mindset of the ideal or project of a free
and equal world based on diversity. We can call this world the
communal world or a utopia of free individuals. The impor-

28
tant thing is to continuously maintain a mindset of freedom
and equality that does not reject differences within the public
sphere and the moral and political life of society.
   Because the intellectual dimension concerns the world of
thought and imagination as well as the solidarity of individu-
als and communities wanting to become a nation, it requires
a limited rearrangement. To this end, developing education in
science, philosophy and art (including religion) and opening
schools with this objective, are the foremost practical steps;
the intellectual and emotional education in relation to becom-
ing a nation is the task of these schools. It is essential to un-
derstand the social culture in relation to now, to our epoch,
just as much as in relation to the historical-societal entity, and
to share their true, good and beautiful aspects in common
thoughts and emotions. In a nutshell, the KCK’s main intel-
lectual task is to envisage the Kurds as a nation within their
true, good, and beautiful world of thought and emotions joint-
ly shared in relation to their own existence. In other words, its
task is to encourage the Kurdish people to become a nation by
means of a scientific, philosophical and artistic revolution and
to create the fundamental conditions (intellectual and emo-
tional) for becoming such a nation, freely sharing the scientif-
ic, philosophical (ideological) and artistic truth of the Kurdish
reality, through self-thought and self-education, sharing the
good and living beautifully. The main demand in terms of the
intellectual dimension from the sovereign nation-states is for
them to adhere fully to freedom of expression and thought. If
nation-states want to coexist with the Kurds under common
norms, then they must respect the Kurdish people’s desire to
create their own intellectual and emotional world and to turn
themselves into a national society on the basis of their own dif-
ferences: the freedom of expression and thought required for
this must be constitutionally guaranteed.

                                                               29
   The second dimension is the reorganisation of social exis­
tence in accordance with its mental world. How is society to
be reorganised in accordance with the intellectual world of a
nation that is shared commonly? Democratic autonomy lies at
the heart of the reorganisation of this physical existence. It is
possible to define democratic autonomy in both a broad and
narrow sense. In the broadest sense, democratic autonomy is
the expression of the democratic nation. The democratic na-
tion has dimensions divided across a wider range. It can be
defined in terms of its cultural, economic, social, legal, diplo-
matic and other dimensions. In the narrow sense, democratic
autonomy represents the political dimension; in other words,
it means democratic authority or governance. The democrat-
ic autonomy dimension of becoming a democratic nation is
much more problematic in terms of relations with sovereign
nation-states. Sovereign nation-states generally reject demo-
cratic autonomy. They do not wish to recognise it as a right
unless they are obliged to do so. With regard to the Kurds,
the acceptance of democratic autonomy lies at the heart of
a reconciliation with nation-states. Democratic autonomy is
the minimum requirement to live under a common political
roof of a nation-state with a dominant ethnicity. Anything less
would lead to an increase in conflict and a worsening of the
situation – not a solution. Especially lately, there is the effort
to implement the liberal “individual and cultural rights” pro-
ject – originally developed by the English capitalism in order
to rule their working class and colonies – in the Republic of
Turkey via AKP. This project, which is alien to Middle Eastern
culture, will only serve to expand the conflict. Democratic
autonomy is the most suitable solution for the nation-state.
Anything less would only fuel further conflict and war.




30
5.2 The Democratic Autonomy Solution and its
Implementation
The democratic autonomy solution can be implemented in
two ways:
   The first is predicated on finding a compromise with nation-
states. It finds its concrete expression in a democratic consti-
tutional solution. It respects the historical-societal heritage of
peoples and cultures. It regards the freedom of expression and
organisation of these heritages as one of the irrevocable and
fundamental constitutional rights. Democratic autonomy is
the fundamental principle of these rights. The foremost condi-
tions of this arrangement are that the sovereign nation-state re-
nounces all denial and annihilation policies, and the oppressed
nation abandons the idea of forming its own nation-state. It is
difficult for a democratic autonomy project to be implement-
ed without both nations renouncing statist tendencies in this
regard. EU countries took more than 300 years of nation-state
experience before they could accept democratic autonomy as
the best solution for solving nation-states’ regional, national
and minority related problems.
   In the solution to the Kurdish question, too, the path that
is meaningful and consistent is the one that does not rely on
separatism and violence and that accepts democratic autono-
my. All other paths will either lead to a postponement of prob-
lems, and therefore to a deepening of the impasse, or to vio-
lent conflict and separation. The history of national problems
is littered with such examples. The relative peace, wealth and
prosperity of the EU countries – the home of national con-
flicts – in the past 60 years were achieved by their acceptance
of democratic autonomy and their ability to find flexible and
creative solutions to regional, national and minority problems.
The opposite has been true of the Republic of Turkey. The
nation-statism that was wished to be brought to completion

                                                               31
through the denial and annihilation of Kurds has drawn the
republic to the brink of disintegration, huge problems, con-
tinuous crises, military coups that are resorted every ten years,
and a special warfare regime that is conducted together with
Gladio. Only when the Turkish nation-state abandons these
policies, and accepts the democratic autonomy of all cultures
(including Turkish and Turkmen), and specifically the Kurdish
cultural entity’s democratic autonomy, will it achieve lasting
peace and prosperity as a normal, lawful, secular and demo-
cratic republic.
   The second path for a democratic autonomy solution – one
that does not depend on finding a compromise with nation-
states – is to implement its own project unilaterally. In the
broad sense, it recognises the Kurdish people’s right to become
a democratic nation through the implementation of democrat-
ic autonomy. It goes without saying that in this case conflicts
will intensify with those sovereign nation-states who do not
accept this unilateral implementation of becoming a demo-
cratic nation. If this happens, the Kurds will have no other
choice but to adopt a full-scale mobilisation and war position
in order to protect their existence and to live freely against the
individual or joint attacks of nation-states (Iran, Syria and
Turkey). They will not hold back from becoming a democratic
nation with all its dimensions and to develop and realize their
aspirations through their own efforts until they either reach a
compromise or achieve independence amidst the warfare.

5.3 The KCK and the Dimensions of Becoming a
Democratic Nation
In light of these general definitions of the nation, the KCK
rejects state-nationist approaches and bases itself on the demo-
cratic nationist model, acknowledging the Kurdish people’s
right to become a nation or achieving their transformation to a

32
national society through democratic autonomy.
  If we liken societies, especially the democratic nations of our
era, to a live organism, then we can say that all its parts and
dimensions are interconnected and co-exist as in the integral
whole of a live organism. Therefore, although each and every
dimension is discussed on their own right they must always be
considered as parts of a whole. A more detailed understand-
ing of the way in which a democratic nation can be created
follows:

1 – The Free Individual-Citizen and Democratic
­Communal Life
 The individual-citizen of a democratic nation has to be com-
 munal as well as free. The allegedly free individual of capitalist
 individualism, who has been provoked against the society, es-
 sentially lives a life of abject slavery. However, liberal ideol-
 ogy creates an image where the individual apparently possesses
 limitless freedom. In reality the individual, enslaved by waged
 labour, represents the most developed form of slavery. This
 type of individual is produced through the relentless education
 of, and life in, nation-statism. Because his or her life is bound
 to the sovereignty of money, the wage system, in effect like a
 dog’s leash, ensures that the individual can be manipulated as
 desired: He or she has no other means of surviving. If he seeks
 to escape, that is, if he opts for unemployment, it is in effect
 a death sentence. Moreover, capitalist individualism has been
 shaped on the basis of society’s denial. He thinks that he can
 only realise himself insofar as he rejects the culture and tradi-
 tions of historical society. This is the biggest distortion of lib-
 eral ideology. Its principal slogan is “there is no society, there is
 the individual”.
    As opposed to this, the democratic nation’s individual sees
 his or her freedom in the communality of society, in the form

                                                                   33
of the more functional life of small communities. A free and
democratic commune or community is the main school in
which the individual of the democratic nation takes shape.
Without a commune or communal life, the individual can-
not be fully realised. Communes are diverse and valid in every
sphere of societal life. In accordance with their diversity, indi-
viduals can exist in more than one commune or community.
The important thing is for the individual to know how to live
in a communal community in accordance with his or her tal-
ents, labour and diversity. The individual considers her respon-
sibility towards her commune or the social units to which she
is attached to be the guiding moral principle. Morality means
respect and commitment to the community and communal
life. The commune or community in turn protects the indi-
vidual and enhances his or her life. After all, the fundamental
principle behind the founding of human society is this very
principle of moral responsibility. The democratic character of
the commune or communities is what realises the collective
freedom – in other words, the political commune or com-
munity. A commune or a community that is not democratic
cannot be political. A commune or community that is not po-
litical cannot thus be free. There is a close correlation between
the political and democratic character of the commune and its
freedom.
   The definition of the democratic nation’s individual-citi-
zen becomes slightly broader when she or he lives under the
same political roof with a nation-state. In this case, within the
framework of “constitutional citizenship”, she is as much an
individual-citizen of the nation-state as she is of the demo-
cratic nation. The point here is the recognition of the status
of the democratic nation, whereby democratic autonomy is
acknowledged to have legal status in the national constitu-
tion. Democratic national status is two-fold. First, it denotes

34
the status, law and constitution of democratic autonomy.
Secondly, autonomy is incorporated as a sub-section of the na-
tional constitutional status.
   Although the unilateral construction of a democratic nation
based on the free individual-citizen and communal unity of
KCK is a priority, it is also possible for KCK to arrive at an
agreement with those sovereign nation-states who acknowl-
edge the status of democratic autonomy within the national
democratic constitution. KCK recognises both the life of
the free individual-citizen and community and the extent to
which this life is bound by a legal and constitutional status.
   Capitalist individualism requires absolute servitude to the
nation-state god; whereas democratic nation citizenship fos-
ters the development of the free individual in the truest sense.
The democratic nation citizenship of the Kurds can be realised
under the KCK status. Therefore, it may be more appropriate
to define membership of the KCK as being democratic nation
citizenship. It is an irrevocable right and duty for the Kurdish
people to be citizens of their own democratic nation. To be
unable to be a citizen of one’s own nation is a huge alienation
and is indefensible.

2 – Political Life and Democratic Autonomy
It is possible to define the school of social sciences that studies
the ontology and development of societal nature on the ba-
sis of moral and political society as the system of democratic
civilisation. Determining moral and political society to be
our fundamental unit is also important as this comprises the
dimensions of historicity and integrality. Moral and political
society is the most historical and holistic narrative of society.
Morality and politics can be seen as history itself. A society
with a moral and political dimension is a society that is in
harmony with its existence and development. Society can ex-

                                                                35
ist without exploitation, classes, cities, power, nation and the
state, but a society devoid of morals and politics is unthink-
able.
   A moral and political society is a democratic society.
Democracy can only attain meaning on the basis of the exis­
tence of an open and free society; that is, moral and political
society. Democratic society, where individuals and groups be-
come a subject, corresponds with a form of governance that
most effectively develops moral and political society. More
precisely, the functionality of political society is what we al-
ready call democracy. Politics and democracy, in the true sense,
are identical concepts. If freedom is the arena in which poli-
tics expresses itself, then democracy is the modus operandi of
politics within that arena. The trio of freedom, politics and de-
mocracy cannot be devoid of a moral base. We can also define
morals as the institutionalised or traditional form of freedom,
politics and democracy.
   Moral and political societies are in dialectical contradiction
with the state, which is the official expression of all forms of
capital, ownership and power. The state constantly desires to
replace morals with law and politics with bureaucratic admin-
istration. On the twin poles of this historical contradiction,
the official state civilisation and the unofficial democratic civi-
lisation coexist. Two separate typologies of meaning emerge.
The contradictions can either intensify and lead to war, or rec-
oncile and lead to peace.
   Today, in particular the problematic nature of nation-states
is propelling political societies and their governing forces to-
wards becoming a democratic nation, compelling them to be-
come democratic nations either through reform or revolution.
While nation-states were the dominant tendency during the
rise of capitalism, under the current conditions of its downfall
the dominant tendency is evolving towards the democratic na-

36
tion. In this regard, it is very important not to equate political
force with state power. Politics cannot be equated with power
and its institutionalised form, the state. Freedom is in the na-
ture of politics. Politicised societies and nations are societies
and nations that are becoming free.
   Politics not only liberates, it also regulates. Politics is a
unique regulatory force; is a kind of art. It represents the op-
posite of the suppressive regulations of states and rulers. The
stronger the politics in a society or nation, the weaker the state
and ruling powers. The opposite is also true: the stronger the
state or ruling power is in a society or nation, the weaker the
politics – and hence freedom – in that society.
   Just as a society or nation that gains state and ruling power
does not become free even if there were any democratic fea-
tures, it also faces the prospect of losing whatever freedoms it
previously had. This is why the more we clear the society from
the state and power, the more we open it up to freedom. And
the fundamental condition that is necessary for liberating that
society and nation is for it to maintain itself in a permanent
political position.
   It will be seen that the democratic civilisation system has
always existed and sustained itself as the other face of official
civilisation’s history, in essence as the moral and political unity
of societal nature. Despite the suppression and exploitation by
the official world system, the other face of society could not be
eliminated. In any case, its destruction is not possible. Just as
capitalism cannot exist without a non-capitalist society, civili-
sation as the official world system too cannot exist without the
existence of the democratic civilisation system. More concrete-
ly, the civilisation with monopoly could not exist without the
civilisation with no monopoly. The opposite of this is not true.
In other words, democratic civilisation, the historical flow of
the moral and political society, could exist quite comfortably

                                                                37
and more unobstructedly without the official civilisation. I de-
fine democratic civilisation both as a thought system, an ac-
cumulation of thought, as well as a totality of moral rules and
political organs.
   We conceptualised the political dimension of the KCK’s
construction of democratic nation as democratic autonomy.
Without self-governance democratic nation is unthinkable. In
general all forms of nations and in particular democratic na-
tions are societal entities that have their own self-governance.
If a society is deprived of self-governance, it ceases to be a na-
tion. The Kurds were not only prevented from becoming a na-
tion, they also ceased to exist as a society. The guidance by
the PKK and the policies of the KCK not only stopped this
process, but also initiated the process of becoming a demo-
cratic nation rather than a political society. Kurds, in the cur-
rent stage, are not only a society that has become an intensely
political society, but a society that also works to transform this
political reality into a democratic nation.
   The KCK plays a key role in the construction of the dem-
ocratic nation and may be translated as the equivalent of
democratic autonomy. The KCK’s fulfilment of its role as the
organ for democratic politics is indispensable in the creation
of a democratic nation. To confuse it with a nation-state is a
deliberate distortion. The KCK, as a principle, has ceased to
employ nation-statism as a tool for a solution. It is neither
the first nor the last stage of nation-statism. They are both
qualitatively different concepts of authority. Although it may
contain features that are reminiscent of the nation-states’ in-
stitutionalisation in terms of its organisational structure, it
is quintessentially different. KONGRA-GEL, as the KCK’s
decision-making body, means People’s Assembly. Its impor-
tance is derived from people making their own decisions
themselves. The People’s Assembly is a democratic organ. It

38
is the alternative to becoming a nation governed by the up-
per classes or the bourgeoisie. KONGRA-GEL signifies be-
coming a nation governed by the popular classes and stratum
of intellectuals. It is essentially different from the bourgeois
parliamentarian system. The Executive Council of the KCK
expresses the condensed and centralised daily administration
pyramid. It ensures coordination between the working units
scattered among the people. It coordinates the daily organisa-
tional-operational work involved in becoming a democratic
nation as well as governing and defending it. The Council
should not be confused with government organs of the state.
It is closer to the system of confederations of democratic civil
societies. The KCK’s General Presidential Institution, rest-
ing on election by the people, is the most general and highest
level of representation. It supervises and monitors the com-
patibility between all the KCK’s units and the application of
fundamental policies.
   It is clear that during such a period and under new condi-
tions there will be considerable competition, contention and
conflict between the nation-states’ institutions and forces and
the KCK’s institutions and forces. There will be different au-
thorities and governances in the cities and rural areas.

3 – Social Life
In the process of becoming a democratic nation, important
transformations occur in social life. Traditional life in capitalist
modernity undergoes great changes.
   The dominant modern lifestyle has turned into a complete
trap based around the oldest slave, the woman. In capitalism,
women have been turned into the ‘queens of commodity’.
They are not only unwaged workers, as ‘housewives’, they are
the lowest wage earner outsides of the house and the main tool
for lowering wages.

                                                                 39
   The woman is the foremost constituent of flexible employ-
ment. She is an industrial incubator producing the new gen-
erations required by the capitalist system. She is the principal
tool for the advertising industry. Her servitude perpetuates
sexism. From the global to the little emperor in the family,
she is the instrument of unlimited pleasure and power of all
dominant men. She is the object that gives birth to the power
of those who never had power. At no point in history has the
woman been exploited as much as she has been during capital-
ist modernity. All other slaveries – child and male slavery –
have developed in the footsteps of women’s enslavement. This
is why in the social life imposed by capitalism everyone, except
for those who rule, has been infantilised as much as enslaved.
The family, which is shaped around the woman and is the old-
est institution of society, is disintegrating yet again around the
woman. What disintegrates the family is capitalism’s manner
of accumulation. This manner can only materialise itself as it
consumes society and the expected result is that society can
be consumed and atomised in so far as it is able to destroy the
fundamental cell of the society; the family.
   No matter how much the field of medicine is developed,
it is unable to stop the rapid spread of disease within society.
Nationalism, religionism, powerism and sexism are the cogni-
tive and emotional DNA of capitalism, constantly generating
diseases both individually and institutionally. The increasing
number of inherent illnesses is an indicator of mental and psy-
chological disease – the inevitable outcome of capitalism’s de-
structive effect on society.
   In modern social life, the education system is responsible for
the creation of the anti-social individual. Both the liberal in-
dividualist life and the life of the nation-statist citizen are pro-
grammed and implemented in accordance with the require-
ments of capitalism. For this purpose, a huge industry called

40
the education sector has been formed. In this sector, individu-
als are bombarded twenty-four hours a day both mentally and
spiritually in order to be turned into anti-social beings. They
are stunted from being moral and political. They are turned
into individuals who are compelled to consume, who run after
money, are sexist, chauvinist and lickspittle. This is how so-
cial nature is destroyed. Education is not used to enhance the
healthy functioning of society, but to destroy it.
   A democratic nation is above all adamant about remaining
as a society; it stands against capitalist modernity with the slo-
gan “society or nothing”. It insists on the sustenance of society
as a historical-social reality, although the society is dissolved
within the grindstones of modernity.
   Because the democratic nation’s understanding of education
targets sociality and the free individual-citizen, the dialectic of
the development of the individual with the society and soci-
ety’s development with the individual is re-established. The
socialising, liberating and equalising role of sciences is reaf-
firmed. Democratic nation is the nationhood of a society that
has acquired a true awareness of its existence.

4 – Free Partner Life
We know that there are three main functions for all living or-
ganisms: nutrition, self-preservation and preservation of the
species. These fundamental functions take on a new level in
humans.
  Once the consciousness of the desire to live is attained, it
should also be understood that through procreation alone one
can not grasp the meaning of life. Just as reproduction does
not make life meaningful, it might even distort and weaken
the emergent power of consciousness. Having awareness of
one’s own self is undoubtedly an amazing formation in the
universe. Ascribing divinity to the human being was not in

                                                                41
vain. Continuing the bloodline of the conscious human not
only impairs the balance, to the detriment of other living be-
ings, it also endangers humanity’s power of consciousness. In
short, the main problem of the conscious human cannot be
the continuation of its bloodline. If, as far as we know, the
universe has achieved the highest level of power to know it-
self within the human being for the very first time, then this
is something worth getting very excited about. Maybe under-
standing the universe is the true meaning of life. This, in turn,
would mean that the life-death cycle has been transcended;
there could be no greater source of excitement and rejoicing
for humanity.
   The most important result of the PKK’s revolutionary peo-
ple’s war in relation to male chauvinism is its understanding
that the liberation and freedom of society is only possible
through the analysis of phenomenon of woman, as well as her
liberation and freedom. However, as it has been pointed out,
the Kurdish male mistakenly defines his so-called honour in
terms of his absolute sovereignty over women. This egregious
contradiction needs to be resolved.
   On the way to building a democratic nation, we will have
to do the opposite of what has been done to date in the name
of honour. I am talking about a transformed Kurdish man-
hood, and in part I am talking about myself. And it should
be done like this: we must abandon any notion of ownership
in relation to women. Women should only belong to herself
(xwebûn). She should know that she has no owner, and that
the only owner she has is herself. We should not be attached
to women with any emotions of subordination, including love
and blind love. Likewise, the woman too should stop herself
from being dependent and owned. This should be the first
condition of being a revolutionary, a militant. Those who
come through this experience successfully, are those who re-

42
alise freedom in their personality, and who can build the new
society and democratic nation starting with their own liber-
ated personalities.
   The liberation of women is very important in the process of
becoming a democratic nation. The liberation of women is the
liberation of society. The society that becomes free on the oth-
er hand is democratic nation. I talked about the revolutionary
significance of reversing the role of the man. This means, in-
stead of approaching the woman as a means of continuing his
bloodline or dominating her, he should sustain the process of
becoming a democratic nation through his own strength, he
should form the ideological and organisational power needed
for this, and should ensure the sovereignty of his own political
authority; thus he should ideologically and politically produce
himself. Thus, rather than physical reproduction, he must en-
sure spiritual and intellectual empowerment. Capitalist mo-
dernity is a system based on the denial of love. The denial of
society, the uncontrollability of individualism, pervasive sex-
ism, the deification of money, the substitution of nation-state
for god, and the transformation of women into unwaged or
low paid workers also mean denial of the material basis of
love.
   The female nature must be well understood. To approach
a woman’s sexuality solely by finding her biologically attrac-
tive, and to relate to her on this basis is the loss of love from
the very beginning. Just as we don’t call the biological mating
of other species love, we cannot call biologically based sexual
intercourse between humans love either. We can call this the
normal breeding activity of living beings. There is no need to
be human to conduct these activities. Those who want true
love have to abandon this animal-human type of reproduction.
We can see women as valuable friends and comrades only to
the extent that we transcend viewing them as objects of sexual

                                                              43
appeal. The most difficult relationship is one of friendship and
camaraderie with a woman that transcends sexism. Even when
life is freely shared with a woman as a partner, the building of
society and democratic nation should form its basis. We must
overcome the traditional boundaries, and as in modernity, of
seeing women only in the roles of partners, mothers, sisters or
lovers. First and foremost, we must forge strong human rela-
tionships based on a common understanding and the building
of society. If a man wants to have a relationship with a woman
that has a strong ideological and societal foundation, then he
needs to leave the choice and the courting to the woman. The
more woman’s level of freedom, ability to choose freely, and
mobility based on her own strength have developed, the more
one can live with her meaningfully and beautifully.
   We continuously emphasise that the conditions under
which jin and jiyan cease to be woman and life reflect the col-
lapse and disintegration of the society. Without this reality be-
ing understood and acted on, it is impossible for those compo-
nents that we call revolution, revolutionary party, guides and
militants to play their role. It is impossible for those who are
themselves in a deadlock to solve other peoples’ deadlocks and
to make them free. The most important consequence of the
PKK and its revolutionary people’s warfare in this regard is
that the liberation and freedom of society can only be achieved
through the analysis of the phenomenon of woman, and her
liberation and freedom.

5 – Economic Autonomy
When state power is arranged as nation-state, capitalist moder-
nity and especially its maximum profit and capital accumula-
tion realised over economy can be materialised. Without this
instrument, maximum profit and capital accumulation cannot
be achieved. It represents the realisation of the maximum level

44
of economic plunder with a certain amount of legitimacy in
the history of civilisation. A correct definition of the nation-
state cannot be made without analysing its relationship to
maximum profit and capital accumulation. The nation-state
cannot solely be defined as a system of tyranny and power ei-
ther. Only when state power is organised as a nation-state can
capitalist modernity and, in particular, its maximum profit
and capital accumulation over the economy be materialised.
This means that the nation-state’s control over the econom-
ic life of society has allowed the state to seize more surplus-
value than ever. It is coated with the varnish of nationalism
and patriotism, deified through education, and penetrates
society completely to legitimise the economic extortion it has
perpetrated. Concepts, theories and institutions developed in
the fields of law, political economy and diplomacy all pursue
legitimacy with the same objective. Enforcement of a relent-
less terror together with attainment of maximum profit in the
economic domain on the one hand condemns society to mini-
mum waged labour, while on the other hand it transforms the
majority into an army of unemployed. Low-wage slavery and
an enormous army of unemployed are the natural consequenc-
es of maximum profit, the nation-state and industrialism.
   The realisation of these three fundamental components of
capitalist modernity is only made possible when society looses
control and the freedom to make choices over its economic
life, is condemned to waged slavery, the majority of the popu-
lation is transformed into an army of the unemployed, and
when women are condemned to unpaid or low-wage slavery.
Capitalism’s social sciences in general, and in particular its po-
litical economy, are mythologies which concocted to conceal
and distort these facts; one must never believe them and must
know what these myths entail.
   Kurdish society is a society that has been frightened to stand

                                                               45
up for itself as a consequence of the cultural genocide it has
endured through conquests, occupations, invasions, looting,
colonialism, and assimilation, as well as the consequences of
capitalist modernity. It is a society that has lost control over its
own economy and has been taken under the complete control
of the three-legged modern monster of foreign and collabora-
tionist elements. The fact that it only works to be able to feed
itself shows that it is a society that has been tied down to a
genocidal intent. It is a society in which women, the creators
of economy, are completely rendered unemployed and their la-
bour the least valued. It is a society whose men have been scat-
tered across the world in search of work in order to support
their families. It is a society in which people kill each other for
a chicken or a plot of land. Clearly, such a society has ceased to
be a society and is one that has crumbled and dissolved.
   Economic occupation is the most dangerous of all occupa-
tions. It is the most barbaric way to degrade, and destroy a
society. More than the suppression and tyranny of the nation-
state, Kurdish society has been eviscerated by the loss of its
economic tools and of control of its economic domain. It is
not possible for a society to maintain its freedom once it has
lost control over its means of production and market. The
Kurds have not only effectively lost control over their means
and relations of production; they have also lost control over
their production, consumption and trade. More precisely, it
was only possible for them to make use of their property, and
partake in trade and industry insofar as they attached them-
selves to sovereign nation-states through relinquishing their
identities. Economic captivity was an effective tool in the de-
nial of identity and loss of freedom. The unilateral enterprises
established over the rivers and oil reservoirs have not only de-
stroyed ancient cultural artefacts but also much fertile land.
The intensification of economic colonialism which came after

46
political and cultural colonisation was the final nail in the cof-
fin. The final point arrived at is: “either cease to be a society,
or die!”
   The economic system of a democratic nation not only puts
a stop to these barbaric practices, it bases itself on society re-
establishing control over its own economy. Economic auton-
omy is the minimum compromise to be reached between the
nation-state and democratic nation; any lesser compromise is
a mandate for surrender and annihilation. The furthering of
economic autonomy to independence would mean establish-
ing an opposing nation-state, which is ultimately surrendering
to capitalist modernity. Relinquishing economic autonomy, on
the other hand, would mean surrendering to the dominant na-
tion-state. The essence of economic autonomy predicates nei-
ther private capitalism nor state capitalism. It is predicated on
ecological industry and communal economy – the form where
democracy is reflected in the economy. Industry, development,
technology, businesses and ownership are bound by the princi-
ple of being an ecological and democratic society. In economic
autonomy there is no room for industry, technology, develop-
ment, ownership or rural-urban settlement that negate ecolog-
ical and democratic society. The economy cannot be left to be
a domain where profit and capital accumulation materialises.
   Economic autonomy is a model in which profit and capi-
tal accumulation is minimised. Although it does not reject the
market, trade, product variety, competition and productivity,
it does, however, reject the dominance of profit and capital ac-
cumulation. Finance and financial systems are validated only
insofar as they serve economic productivity and functionality.
Making money from money is regarded as the most effortless
form of exploitation, which has no place in economic autono-
my. The economic autonomy of a democratic nation does not
regard work as drudgery, but as an act of liberation. To see

                                                               47
work as drudgery is to be alienated from the results of labour.
When the results of labour serve one’s own identity and the
individual’s freedom, the situation changes for the better. This
isn’t the same as real socialism’s efforts of collectivisation either.
In the commune, there is no place for drudgery or for work
and labour that are not liberating.
   The dams built on Kurdistan’s rivers have led to historical
genocide and ecological disaster. No dam that ignores ecol-
ogy, the fertile land or the history can be permitted; even those
that have already been built will not be replaced when they
decay. If possible, early elimination should not be avoided.
Opposition to deforestation and erosion – the biggest enemy
of society and life – chimes with the spirit of total mobilisa-
tion. It declares the protection of land and reforestation to be
the most valuable forms of labour.
   The KCK, as the backbone of the democratic nation, predi-
cates itself on and sees economic autonomy and communal
economy as essential to the self-defence of society. Just as so-
ciety cannot sustain itself without self-defence, the nourish-
ment and sustenance of society is only possible with economic
autonomy, dependent on soil conservation and reforestation,
ecology and commune.
   Economic autonomy also requires a legal basis. The uni-
formity and centralism of the laws of the sovereign nation-state
hamper economic creativity, the environment and competition
under the pretext of unity. In place of such an understanding
of law essentially based on economic colonialism, there is an
urgent need for a localised economy that functions autono-
mously but which takes into account coordination with the
national economy. An economic law that makes allowance for
local market dynamics, but which does not deny the national
market, is crucial. A single central legal system is the biggest
factor for conservatism. It is completely political and makes no

48
economic sense.

6 – Legal Structure
Democratic law is a law based on diversity. More importantly,
it makes little reference to legal regulation and is a simple con-
struct. Throughout history, the sovereign nation-state is a state
form that has developed legal regulations to the greatest ex-
tent, in order to eliminate the moral and political society. Past
societies attempted to a large extent to solve their problems
through moral and political regulations. Capitalist modernity
attempted to vest all of its legitimacy on law. Capitalist mo-
dernity’s excessive intervention in and exploitation of society
led it to resort to a complicated tool called law that formalized
justice.
   Law, rather than consisting of laws regulating the rights and
duties of individuals and society, as it is so often claimed to be,
it is the art of ruling through excessive regulation intended to
legitimise the injustices caused by capitalism. Ruling through
laws rather than moral and political rules is specific to capi-
talist modernity. Rejecting morals and politics, the bourgeoi-
sie resorts to the instrument of law, which gives it enormous
power. In the hands of the bourgeoisie, law is a powerful
weapon. It defends itself through law against both the former
moral and political order and the workers. The power of the
nation-state is largely derived from the power of a legal system
that has been unilaterally regulated. The laws, in a sense, are
the verses of the nation-state god. It prefers to rule its society
through these verses.
   It is for this reason that the democratic nation is sensitive
towards law, especially constitutional law. The democratic
nation is more of a moral and political nation than a nation
based on law. The need for law arises if a life with nation-states
under a common political roof and compromise is opted for.

                                                                49
When this happens, the distinction between national law and
the laws of local government gains importance. When the na-
tion-state laws, which are based on unilaterally centralised bu-
reaucratic interests, constantly face the resistance of local and
cultural democratic groups they must embrace the laws of the
local government.

   Due to the fact that the existence of Kurdistan and Kurds
has been denied, the Kurds have no laws specific to them. In
the Ottoman period, the Kurds had both written and tradi-
tional laws. From 1925 onwards Kurdish identity was regarded
as non-existent, to be wiped from history through conspira-
cies, coups and assimilation. While PKK’s resistance has re-
established the existence of the Kurds, it has not yet been able
to ensure a legal definition. During this period the KCK will
work to persuade the nation-states to recognise the Kurdish
entity legally but if this does not happen, it will unilaterally
develop its own autonomous legal system. However, KCK will
give priority to find itself a place within the national consti-
tutions. Thus, in accordance with such priority, it will work
to express its democratic autonomy status within the national
democratic constitutions. This is what is meant by a peace-
ful and democratic solution to the Kurdish question: National
democratic constitutional compromise based on democratic
autonomy status. If the KCK does not succeed in its preferred
national democratic constitutional solution with democratic
autonomy status based on a compromise, it will make the
transition to unilateral Democratic Autonomous Governance
as its second preferred option. The Democratic Autonomous
Governance in Kurdistan is not a nation-state with governance
through laws. It is the governance of democratic modernity on
a local and regional scale.


50
7 – Culture
The state rests on thousands of years of patriarchal culture.
The state institution is a male invention, where wars with the
objective of pillaging and looting have almost become a form
of production. Instead of woman’s social effectivity based on
production, a transition to man’s social effectivity based on
wars and booty occurred. There is a close correlation between
the enslavement of women and warrior society culture. War
does not produce, it seizes and pillages. Although in certain
specific circumstances violence has played a decisive role in so-
cietal development – clearing the path to freedom, resisting
occupation, invasion and colonialism – it is largely destructive
and negative. The internalised culture of violence in a society
is also fuelled by wars. The sword of war among the states and
the hand of man within the family both epitomise domina-
tion.
   In addition, by formalising the cultural norms of a domi-
nant ethnicity or a religious community under the name of
national culture, capitalist modernity declares war against all
other cultural entities. By claiming that religions, ethnicities,
peoples, nations, languages and cultures that have preserved
themselves for thousands of years “harm national unity”, capi-
talist modernity prepares to destroy them either by force or
through material incentives. In no other time in history have
so many languages, religions, denominations, ethnic tribes and
aşiret as well as peoples and nations fallen victim to these poli-
cies, or to be more precise, genocides. Physical genocides are
actually a drop in the ocean when compared with immaterial
genocide. Cultural and linguistic values together with their
communities that have existed for thousands of years are sacri-
ficed, for the sake of the sacred act of creating ‘national unity’.
   The cultural dimension, too, is very important in the forma-
tion of nations. In the narrow sense, culture represents the tra-

                                                                51
ditional mentality and emotional reality of a society. Again, in
the narrow sense, religion, philosophy, mythology, science and
various art forms constitute the culture of a society. In a way,
they represent the mindset and mental state of a society. In a
nation-state, or as nations are formed by the state, the world
of culture is greatly distorted and decimated. This is because
in no other way can the state legitimise its rule of maximum
profit and capital accumulation. Modernity and the nation-
state cannot develop without first reconstructing culture and
history according to their own interests. The resulting reality
of modernity and nation-state has no relation to reality of his-
tory and culture; it represents a different meaning in terms of
the truth.
   The role of culture in capitalist modernity is vital. Culture,
as the total mentality of all social spheres, is first subjected to
assimilation (to accommodate economic and political hegemo-
ny), then it is turned into an industry to be spread extensively
and intensively to all the societies (nations, peoples, nation-
states, civil society, corporations) of the world. The industriali-
sation of culture is the second most effective means of enslave-
ment. Culture, in a narrow sense, represents the mindset of
societies. Thought, taste and morals are its three fundamental
issues. It has taken centuries for political and economic power
to besiege and buy off the cultural elements. They have regard-
ed the appropriation of cultural elements as indispensable for
their legitimacy throughout civilisational history. Economic
and ruling powers were quick to notice this and to take pre-
cautions. The assimilation of culture by the rulers dates back
to the inception of hierarchy. It is the essential tool for ruling.
Without cultural hegemony, economic and power monopo-
lies cannot rule. The empire stage of capitalism is only possible
with a developed cultural industry. It is for this reason that the
struggle against cultural hegemony requires constant diligence.

52
   In contrast, democratic society, the moral and political so-
ciety’s contemporary form of modernity, is a society that tru-
ly accommodates difference in the broadest sense. All social
groups within democratic society can co-exist on the basis of
differences that form around their own culture and identity
without being confined to a uniform culture and citizenship.
Societies can reveal their potential in terms of identity differ-
entiation to political differentiation, and transform it into an
active life. None of the communities has any concern that they
would be homogenised. Uniformity is seen as deformity, pov-
erty-stricken and boring. Pluriformity, however, offers rich-
ness, beauty and tolerance. Freedom and equality flourish un-
der these conditions. Only equality and freedom that rest on
diversity are valuable. As a matter of fact, freedom and equality
attained via the nation-states is only for monopolies, as proven
around the world. Power and capital monopolies never allow
true freedoms or equality. Freedom and equality can only be
acquired through the democratic politics of democratic soci-
ety, and protected with self-defence.
   Just as it is possible to bring together different ethnic cul-
tures within the scope of the democratic nation, it is also im-
portant to utilise the democratic content of religious culture
within the democratic nation as a free, equal and democratic
component and allow room for it in a resolution. The recon-
ciliatory alliance approach developed by democratic modernity
towards all anti-systemic movements should also be developed
towards the religious culture with democratic content; this is
within the scope of another task that is of vital importance.
The democratic nation tries to compose itself by reinstating
the true meaning of history and culture, which in the process
is reborn in the formation of the democratic nation.
   The democratic nation solution of the Kurdish question is
first and foremost linked to the correct definition of Kurdish

                                                              53
history and culture. The correct definition of its history and
culture will bring the recognition of its social existence with it-
self. The denial and annihilation of the Kurds in the Republic
of Turkey’s history began with the denial of Kurdish history
and the annihilation of its cultural heritage, first eliminating
its immaterial culture and then its material culture. It is for
this reason that it was right for the PKK to begin building with
an awareness of history and culture. By attempting to explain
Kurdish history and culture through comparison with other
people’s history and culture around the world, and to proclaim
it in a manifesto called The Path of the Kurdistan Revolution al-
lowed the PKK to play the role of a revolutionary Renaissance
in the reinvigoration of Kurdish history and culture.
   The construction of the Kurdish democratic nation is
qualitatively different from the nationalist and statist nation-
building processes. It is different from sovereign nation-state
nationalism and Kurdish nationalist and statist approaches; it
is an alternative construction of a nation grounded on the his-
tory and culture of workers and peoples.
   The Kurdish democratic nation will gradually acquire a fur-
ther structural quality under KCK and present a new praxis of
nation construction that will become a model for the Middle
Eastern peoples. It is open to more extensive democratic na-
tional unions and alliances with other peoples on the basis of
an open-ended understanding of democratic nation. It will
initiate the rise of a new era, the era of democratic modernity,
through the revolutionary and democratic nation renaissance
against the cultural and historical denialism of nation-states
that cannot transcend their role as agents of Western moder-
nity.




54
8 – Self-Defence System
All species of living organisms have defence systems of their
own. There is not a single defenceless species. As a matter of
fact, it is possible to interpret the resistance shown by each
element or particle in the universe to protect its existence as
self-defence.
   The same system is more than valid for human species and
societies too. Defence in human species is as much social as it
is biological. Biological defence is performed by the defensive
instincts of every living organism. In societal defence, how-
ever, all the individuals of the community collectively defend
themselves. Moreover, the number of communities and their
organisational form constantly change according to the means
of defence. Defence is an essential function of society. Life
cannot be sustained without it.
   Another important conclusion we can draw from the self-
defence mechanisms of living organisms is that this defence
is only intended for the protection of their existence. They do
not establish dominance and colonisation systems over their
own species or any other species. Systems of domination and
exploitation were first developed by the human species. The
mental development of the human species that resulted in pos-
sibilities of exploitation and in connection with this the at-
tainment of surplus-product plays a role in this. This situation
leads to protecting its existence along with defending the val-
ues of labour, in other words, social wars.
   When we view things from the democratic society perspec-
tive we must underline the following: when we talk about self-
defence rather than a military stance or an armed organisation
what we mean is the organisation of society to protect itself in
every sphere, and for it to struggle based on these organisations.
This said, in order to counter the attacks of the statist system
against society and to protect society, military organisations

                                                               55
may also be needed, to defend society in all its diversity. And
this could be deemed as legitimate defence. But this sort of
military organization, organised in this way, serving to protect
society and its reorganisation, cannot merely be evaluated as a
military organisation either. The function of the military forces
at the service of society, the fundamental self-defence forces, is
to play the role of a catalyst to speed up and protect the strug-
gle of democratic society. Military forces that move away from
these functions cannot avoid being transformed into an offen-
sive force that is an instrument of hegemonic forces.
   Self-defence does not only stipulate an armed structure; al-
though it does not reject the use of force when necessary, it
can not be viewed only as an armed structure. It represents the
organisation of the society in all spheres and in relation to its
own identity and life: the decisions taken to this end reflect so-
ciety’s own will and are implemented at society’s behest. Values
that used to belong to the people and the country but were
usurped by the colonialist powers are retrieved and returned to
social values in an act of self-defence. The society should attain
a position where it can both protect its values and recover its
usurped rights in order for it to govern itself. This is the way to
create a democratic nation.
   A self-defence mechanism for women, as the most oppressed
and suppressed segment of society, is also of vital impor-
tance. Under the patriarchal system all rights of women were
usurped. Women can circumvent these policies of degrada-
tion, harassment, rape and slaughter through the formation of
their own self-defence mechanisms. For this reason, they need
to learn their history, create their own organisations and insti-
tutions, carve out space for themselves in all areas of life and if
necessary create their own military forces.
   An important and indispensable heading within the KCK’s
programme for the construction of a democratic nation is

56
how self-defence is going to be tied to a permanent system-
atic. The nation-states, who are the sole armed monopoly, will
be unsparing if they have the opportunity to implement new
policies of denial, annihilation and assimilation. These policies
have compelled the creation of a permanent self-defence sys-
tem by the KCK. The minimum requirement for coexistence
with nation-states is for the Kurdish identity and existence to
be constitutionally guaranteed. Constitutional guarantee is not
enough: concrete grounds for this guarantee should be sought
through statuses determined by law. Apart from the joint
national defence for external threats, Kurdish society should
meet their own security requirements. This is because a soci-
ety can only ensure its internal security in accordance with its
requirements. Therefore, the related nation-states (the central-
ised nation-states of Turkey, Iran, Iraq and Syria) must imple-
ment important reforms in their own internal security policies.
   If a compromise cannot be agreed with the relevant nation-
states, the KCK, on the basis of protecting the unilateral con-
struction of the democratic nation with all its dimensions,
should try to organise the quantitative and qualitative status of
its own self-defence forces according to new needs.

9 – Diplomacy
One of the most developed activities by the nation-state is
diplomacy between nation-states. Diplomacy describes pre-
war activities between nation-states. It may even be defined as
the preparatory phase for wars in the history of nation-states.
Throughout history there have always been certain rituals of
expressing neighbourhood relations between different types of
communal units. These are deemed very valuable. The reason
nation-states have institutionalised this relationship can be
linked to the profit tendency of capitalist modernity. If rela-
tionships are more profitable in times of peace then there is

                                                              57
no need for war. Diplomacy serves to achieve profitable rela-
tions. If the maximum profit tendency is linked to war, then
diplomatic forces will be unable to avert a profitable war, thus
terminating the need for diplomacy. Diplomacy has been re-
duced to the logic of profit; it no longer has any link to the
meaningful inter-societal relations that existed throughout his-
tory. Diplomacy has been degraded to a manipulative tool in
the game of profitable wars between nation-states.
   Democratic nation diplomacy must first create a common
platform between Kurds who are fragmented and divided in
various ways. All other diplomatic activities, especially those
that each organisation wishes to develop on their own and
according to their own interests, have done more harm than
good and have served further to fragment, create conflict
and divide Kurds. It is for this reason that establishing the
Democratic National Congress is the most vital priority for
Kurdish diplomacy. Diplomacy that rests on the Iraqi-Kurdish
Federal State is important, but cannot meet the needs of all
Kurdish people. This state has neither the ability to meet this
demand nor the conditions that would allow it to do so. A
diplomacy that meets the needs of all Kurds can be developed
only through a Democratic National Congress. Therefore, the
primary task is to assemble the Democratic National Congress
and declare it to be a permanent general integrative national
democratic organisation. It is clear that for some time to come,
relations and contradictions both ideologically and politically
will continue between KCK as it builds a democratic nation
and the Kurdistan Regional Government in Iraq’s nation-
statist construction. In this regard, the Democratic National
Congress may serve as a solution orientated umbrella organisa-
tion.
   Diplomacy, which once again becomes a tool for peace and
solidarity as well as creative exchanges between societies, deals

58
essentially with the solution of problems. Democratic nation
diplomacy is a tool for peace and beneficial relations, not wars.
It signifies a mission where wise people play a role and which
has high ethical and political values. It plays an important role
in developing and maintaining bilaterally beneficial processes
and friendly relations especially amongst neighbouring peoples
and related communities. It is the constructive force of com-
mon socialities and the synthesis of societies at higher levels.
The diplomacy of the democratic nation can play a lasting role
and provide solutions in the context of democratic modernity
between the peoples and nations of the Middle East who have
endured chaos and conflict because of nation-state diplomacy.
The global union of democratic nations, as an alternative to
the UN, is the World Confederation of Democratic Nations.
Continents and large cultural regions can form their own
Confederations of Democratic Nations, too.




                                                              59
6. TO BE A QUESTER OF DEMOCRATIC
NATION SOLUTION




The construction of the democratic nation in Kurdistan is the
new historical and societal expression of the Kurdish existence
and its free life that requires both theoretical and practical
concentration and transformation. It represents a truth that
requires devotion at the level of real love. Just as there is no
room for false love in this voyage, there is also no room for
uncommitted travellers. In this voyage, the question of when
the construction of the democratic nation will be completed is
a redundant one. This is a construction that will never be fin-
ished: it is an ongoing process. The construction of democratic
nation has the freedom to re-create itself at every instant. In
societal terms, there can be no utopia or reality that is more
ambitious than this. In accordance with their historical and
societal reality, the Kurds have vigorously turned towards the
construction of a democratic nation. As a matter of fact, they
have lost nothing by ridding themselves of a nation-state god
in which they never believed; they are rid of a very heavy bur-
den, a burden that brought them to the brink of annihilation.
Instead, they have gained the opportunity to become a demo-
cratic nation.
   The Kurds, as individuals and as a society, must conceive,
internalise and implement the construction of a democratic
nation as the synthesis of all expressions of truth and resistance
throughout their history, including the most ancient goddess
beliefs, Zoroastrianism and Islam. The truths that all the past

60
mythological, religious and philosophical teachings as well
as contemporary social sciences have tried to teach and that
all resistance wars and rebellions have individually and col-
lectively tried to voice are represented in the mind and body
of constructing a democratic nation. It was this reality and its
expression as truth that was my point of departure, not only
when I re-created myself at times but especially arriving at the
present as I tried to re-create myself almost at every instant.
In this way, I freely socialised myself, and concretised this as a
democratic nation (in a Kurdish context), and presented it as
democratic modernity to all humanity, to the oppressed peo-
ples and individuals of the Middle East.
   It is clear that care needs to be taken in order to prevent
liberalism – as it so often has done throughout its history
– from degenerating and dissolving these positive tenden-
cies of democratisation under its own ideological and mate-
rial hegemony. The most strategic task is to unify not only all
system opponents but also the flow of historical-society with
all its urbanist, local and regional political formations in a
new ideological and political structure. In this regard, inter-
twined with comprehensive theoretical work that needs to be
taken up, there is a need to develop a programme and struc-
tures for organisation and action. The conditions are ripe in
the twenty-first century to avoid the fate of confederal struc-
tures which were eliminated by the nation-states in the mid-
nineteenth century, and to achieve the victory of democratic
confederalism. In order for democratic modernity to come
out of the sustained depression, which is the deepest and the
longest lasting depression, sustained only through crisis man-
agement during modernity’s finance capital era, the ability to
succeed in the intellectual, moral and political duties of re-
construction has never had such a vital significance.


                                                               61
7. CONCLUSION




In that case, if new parties for freedom and equality want to
be consistent, then they must develop politics and social forms
that are not centred around the state. The alternative to the
state is democracy. All paths – aside from democracy – that
have been attempted in efforts to counter the state have come
to nothing. Contrary to popular belief, democracy is not a
form of capitalist state. In addition, nothing other than de-
mocracy can restrict the state, and keep it within the law. To
topple a state doesn’t mean you have overcome the state cul-
ture. A new one can always be created to fill the vacuum. Only
democracy shares the same area with the state; by restricting
the state, it widens society’s sphere of freedom. It can thus ap-
proach equality a little more by reducing the number of ap-
propriated values.
   Therefore, we can define democracy to be the self-govern-
ance of a non-state society. Democracy is governance that is
not state; it is the power of communities to govern themselves
without the state. Contrary to popular belief, since its forma-
tion human society has experienced democracy more than it
has experienced the state. Perhaps, the situation of a general
country or nation’s democracy has not been intensely experi-
enced. But the emergence of society’s existence is communal
and democratic. Without communality, or in the absence of
having a democratic reflex, it is impossible for a society to be
solely ruled by the state. The state can only rule by growing

62
at the expense of communality and democracy. The grounds
out of which the state rises and on which it thrives are the
society’s communality – the need for coexistence – and dem-
ocratic stance. There is a dialectic relationship between the
two. Therefore, when society and civilisation meet, the main
contradiction is between the state and democracy. Less of
one is more of the other. Full democracy is statelessness. Full
state sovereignty is the denial of democracy. States can only
be toppled by states; democracy does not topple the state; it
can only pave the way for a newer state like real socialism did.
Democracy’s fundamental function becomes evident in this
manner. It can only increase the opportunities for freedom
and equality by restricting the state, making it smaller and by
trimming its octopus like tentacles over the society. Towards
the end of the process, perhaps the state will become redun-
dant and fizzle out. The conclusion we draw from this is that
the relationship between the state and democracy is not of one
toppling another, but of transcendence.
   What I am trying to show with this short analysis is that
our world-view contained a fundamental mistake from the be-
ginning because of being a state-oriented party. These parties,
whether they form a state or not, cannot achieve their objec-
tives of democracy, freedom and equality through state forma-
tion. Without deviating from this path, one cannot become a
new libertarian and egalitarian party. In short, the way to be-
come a democratic and socialist party is to ensure renewal by
making the transition in the state-oriented theory, programme,
strategy and tactics. There is a need for a non-state orientated
democratic socialist theory, programme, strategy and tactics. If
self-criticism develops within this context, it will be meaning-
ful. Otherwise, the old methods will persist under the guise
of the new. The state of real socialism, social democracy and
national liberation parties is enough to prove this reality.

                                                             63
   Just as it has been the case many times throughout history
between civilisational forces and democratic forces, capitalist
modernity forces and democratic modernity forces can ac-
cept the existence and identity of one another, and can coexist
peacefully on the basis of recognising democratic autonomous
governances. Within this scope and under these conditions,
within and outside the borders of a nation-state, democratic
confederal political formations can peacefully coexist with na-
tion-state formations.
   I have tried to puzzle out and comprehensively analyse the
proposition that while capitalist modernity survives on the ba-
sis of capitalism, industrialism and nation-statism, democratic
modernity can only come into existence through democratic
communality, ecological industry and a democratic nation. I
defined democratic communality not as the egalitarianism of
a homogeneous society but as any type of community (from
women’s to men’s communities, from sports and arts to in-
dustry, from intellectuals to shepherds, from tribes to corpo-
rations, from families to nations, from villages to cities, from
localities to universality and from clan to any type of global
society) of any size. I defined eco-industrial communities as
communities in which the eco-industrial society, the agricul-
tural society of villages, and the industrial society of the cities
nurture each other and are strictly aligned with ecology. On
the other hand I defined the democratic nation too. It is a new
type of nation that encompasses all cultural entities from eth-
nicity to religion; from urban, local, regional to national com-
munities formed through democratic autonomous political
formations and its main political form, democratic confederal-
ist implementations. More precisely, against the nation-statist
monsters, the democratic nation is a nation that has multi-
political formations, multiple identities and is multi-cultural.
   As we try to analyse the 5,000 years of civilisational history

64
in terms of the two conflicting poles, we understand that these
two poles will continue to coexist for some time to come. The
eradication of one of the poles by the other is not foreseeable
in the near future. Moreover, dialectically this does not seem
realistic. The rashness of real socialism in this regard and its at-
tempt to try its own system without first analysing civilisation
and modernity have resulted in its own dissolution. The im-
portant thing is to take into account this bipolarity in all theo-
retical and practical work, and continuously to develop demo-
cratic civilisation and modernity within daily life and through
new constructive work. The more we develop our system
through both revolutionary and evolutionary methods, the
more we can positively solve the problems of term and space
and make the solution permanent. Democratic modernity as a
system, including its fundamental elements, is well suited for
true peace. The democratic nation, with its clear ability to cre-
ate solutions from the smallest national community through
to a world nation, offers a very valuable peace option.
   The important thing is to institutionalise the communal and
democratic identity, which is also the basic stance of peoples
historically, with contemporary science and technological re-
sources by unifying them. In order to have a more democratic,
liberated and ecological social structure, there is a need above
all for a new social sciences structure. It should not be forgot-
ten that the most comprehensive and permanent component
of democratisation is women’s freedom. Without the attain-
ment of societal gender equality, no demand for freedom or
equality can be meaningful or realised.
   Nowadays, democracy is needed, just like bread air and wa-
ter, but nowhere more so than for the peoples of the Middle
East. There is no other option but democracy – all others have
been tested throughout history – that has the ability to bring
happiness to the people. Kurds are at the forefront of these

                                                                 65
peoples. If they can successfully mobilise their geography, his-
torical time and societal characteristics – all of which have be-
come significant strategic elements – in favour of democratic
civilisation in the Middle East, they will have done the greatest
good for their neighbours and for humanity. What we have
undertaken is a draft for this noble and exciting task.




66
ON THE AUTHOR




Abdullah Öcalan, born in 1949, studied political sciences in
Ankara. He actively led the Kurdish liberation struggle as the
head of the PKK from its foundation in 1978 until his abduc-
tion on 15 February 1999. He is regarded as a leading strategist
and one of the most important political representatives of the
Kurdish people.
   Under isolation conditions at Imrali Island Prison, Öcalan
has written more than ten books, which have revolutionised
Kurdish politics. Several times he initiated unilateral ceasefires
of the guerilla and presented constructive proposals for a po-
litical solution to the Kurdish issue.
   The so-called “peace process” started in 2009 when the
Turkish state responded to Öcalan’s call to resolve the Kurdish
issue politically. This process broke down in April 2015, when
the Turkish state unilaterally terminated the talks and returned
to a policy of annihilation and denial.
   Since 27 July 2011, Öcalan has been held again in almost
total isolation at Imrali Island Prison. Since 5 April 2015, the
whole prison has been completely cut off from the rest of the
world.




                                                               67
ON THE INTERNATIONAL INITIATIVE




On 15 February 1999, the President of the Kurdistan Work-
ers Party, Abdullah Öcalan, was handed over to the Republic
of Turkey following a clandestine operation backed by an alli-
ance of secret services directed by their corresponding govern-
ments. Disgusted by this outrageous violation of international
law, several intellectuals and representatives of civil organisa-
tions launched an initiative calling for the release of Abdullah
Öcalan. With the opening of a central coordination office in
March 1999, the International Initiative “Freedom for Abdul-
lah Öcalan – Peace in Kurdistan” started its work.
   The International Initiative regards itself as a multinational
peace initiative working for a peaceful and democratic solu-
tion to the Kurdish question. Even after long years of impris-
onment, Abdullah Öcalan is still regarded as an undisputed
leader by the majority of the Kurdish people. Hence, the solu-
tion of the Kurdish question in Turkey will be closely linked
to his fate. As the main architect of the peace process, he is
viewed by all sides as key to its successful conclusion, which
puts Öcalan’s freedom increasingly firmly on the agenda.
   The International Initiative is committed to play its part to
this end. It does this through disseminating objective informa-
tion, lobbying and public relations work, including running
campaigns. By publishing translations of Öcalan’s prison writ-
ings it hopes to contribute to a better understanding of the
origins of the conflicts and the possible solutions.

68
PUBLICATIONS BY ABDULLAH ÖCALAN

Books
Declaration on the Democratic Solution of the Kurdish
­Question (1999)
 Prison Writings I: The Roots of Civilisation (2007)
 Prison Writings II: The PKK and the Kurdish Question in the
 21st Century (2011)
 Prison Writings III: The Road Map to Negotiations (2012)
 Civilization: The Age of Masked Gods and Disguised Kings
 (Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization, Volume I) (2015)

Upcoming and Untranslated
Capitalism: The Age of Unmasked Gods and Naked Kings
(Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization, Volume II) (autumn 2016)
Sociology of Freedom (Manifesto for a Democratic Civiliza-
tion, Volume III) (spring 2017)
Bir Halkı Savunmak (Turkish 2004)
Ortadoğu’da Uygarlık Krizi ve Demokratik Uygarlık Çözümü
(Manifesto for a Democratic Civilization, Volume IV) (Turkish 2010)
Kürt Sorunu ve Demokratik Ulus Çözümü (Manifesto for a
Democratic Civilization, Volume V) (Turkish 2012)

Brochures
War and Peace in Kurdistan (2008)
Democratic Confederalism (2011)
Liberating Life: Woman’s Revolution (2013)
Democratic Nation (2016)

This brochure is compiled from Bir Halkı Savunmak and
­Manifesto for a Democratic Civilisation, Volumes I, II, III and V

More information and translations in other languages:
www.ocalan-books.com
                                                               69
70
Published by:
International Initiative “Freedom for Abdullah Öcalan – Peace in Kurdistan”
